this is why I moved to san francis
this is the groundbreaking ceremony for
the sfmoma
and I saw that you know underground
video store in New York City in 1994 and
I thought I gotta I gotta get into that
and I came here because I wanted to join
survival research labs but it turned out
there a bunch of meth heads and I didn't
do that so but um and they didn't want
me but the but this is another thing
that was happening drag card race is
made out of power tools wicked
and eventually after you'll notice that
they totally just get beat up at the end
after a while we realize we need to put
some padding you see they're attached to
power cords along the way don't we get
him and then we used to do this here
this is a band called rube Waddell there
was a shoe store a block away from here
on mission street called leads shoe
store and they had a live at Leeds
performance about every friday night for
about six or seven years in the mission
and regularly on the sidewalk about 200
people gathered here listening to this
guy's be their homemade instruments and
was super fun all the music was about
pirates and about failed and Arctic
expeditions and that was really good um
but all it's gone none of that is in San
Francisco anymore um and for a while I
had a really hard time with that um and
I kind of mourned it and I'm kind of
wondered what I was doing here and what
I've come to and what I want to talk to
this group about because this is the
nexus of where this change is happening
is is the story that we tell ourselves
about what's happening in San Francisco
and about what to do about that because
I can't stay in mourning for survival
research labs and I'm the power to drag
races forever so what do we do right so
so I think the way that you talk about
this it has to really acknowledge this
idea of this kind of confluence of art
and tech and cities and money these are
things that are inextricably linked in
this city especially in this place and
it's not the easiest conversation to
have but if we don't have it um the arts
are not going to have a real place at
the table moving forward and they're
going to go the way of power tool drag
racers and so our research labs and and
and i don't i don't want to do that so i
think that what we have to do is to talk
about money in the arts and we have to
talk about commitment to place because
if we don't then the arts are going to
be a bit player in in this city in 20
years and i love it here too much to let
that happen
it's just not enough to move to the
fringes anymore that that that that's
cycle of moving into lower-income
neighborhoods and then being in there
for a little island and having the
yuppies come in and take over it's just
not not not good enough anymore so
luckily we're here in a good place to
talk about this and I I just have to say
I'm totally blown away to be standing in
a movie theater on Mission Street I mean
this is totally amazing what's going on
right in this place is really I just
can't believe it so so what I want to
talk about is how we do art in a boom
because we have to do art in a boom
can't just you know stop it's not going
to work and so what I want to talk about
is some work that I've been doing to try
to to engage in the space to talk about
some work that others have been doing to
engage in this and and to talk about I'm
why this is not just important for San
Francisco but for cities in general and
for art in general so so this place as I
understand it there's a there's a
10-year lease which is amazing to think
that this is still going to be here in
2025 and the landlord is friendly and
interested in gray area and is
interested in selling and that's totally
spectacularly great that is a different
way of engaging with art in the city
then what's happening in San Francisco
before and I think what it does it I'm
just kind of smooth weekly up here sorry
em what it does is it starts to break
this cycle that started in Soho in the
60s when artists moved into derelict
spaces and took them over and then the
yuppies moved in and now it became a
fancy place this idea that I'm that and
I think there's some kind of dichotomies
that we set up when we talk about the
Arts I'm is that that the community
means that you're poor there's no way
for their to for money to do anything
other than reinforce the status quo and
that to do art means you need to live in
poverty and I think it's time to stop
that dichotomy and move forward this is
the place that that's happening and I
think that it's time to start talking
about permanent home in the city for art
and for artists so that we're not on the
fringes anymore and so that we're not
pushed out we want to be able to control
our destiny in our environment so I want
to start with a few organizations that
are
working specifically in the arts to
address this and talk about some work
that I've been doing so this is a group
called art home they're in new york city
they help artists particularly artists
in particular by houses so they don't
get moved just that basic thing about
where do i live and do art these guys
are these people are working on that
there's a number of other ways that this
kind of stuff is happening this is in
milwaukee and a group of neighbors got
together formed an investment
corporation you could buy shares for as
little as a thousand dollars and they
pulled their resources and they bought a
bunch of building and other renting to
bakers and brewers this is an art
specific but it's the kind of thing that
can happen and it's kind of thing that
that is happening and then the one that
got me really excited when I started to
hear about this have been talking with
the National Endowment for the Arts
about this Laura Cullinan is doing a
great job there is this thing called
noteworthy federal credit union and it's
in Cleveland and what it does is it lets
it lets the artists that are in the
Cleveland Orchestra leverage the value
of their musical instruments to buy
property so you have a you know $80,000
French horn $50,000 French or 20,000 old
French or whatever it is you can get a
twenty-thousand-dollar loan put that on
a place and buy a place right so this
and I think this is the the conversate
will keep saying I think this is the
conversation that I'm having and that I
want to have is how do we and an artists
and people who are engaged in creative
art work leverage the capital that we
have instead of just being broke all the
time because it's not working the city
of San Francisco is doing what it can to
help here Amy Cohen at the mayor's
office of economic and workforce
development has a plan for called invest
in neighborhoods and they've identified
a bunch of neighborhoods that the city
is willing to provide assistance with
for for artists and others um that is
Amy's email address and her phone number
she knows that I'm that I got this some
she knows that she's um anyway she knows
you're gonna call her
yep what I want to say is that it can be
done it doesn't this this story of lost
the story of having to leave the story
being pushed out by rapacious developers
it's not the only story and it's a story
that's um that that is that I'm tired of
and i'm bored of and i'm working to fix
it and i would like i'd like to help um
so moving on to work that I've been
doing I was lucky enough to meet a woman
through stamen named Jen rainin um who
invited me to be on the board of her
foundation the Kenneth rainin foundation
and we do a lot of work in the bay area
of supporting Performing Arts and we
started doing a bunch of listening what
artists needed beyond kind of individual
grants and the real need that we started
to hear was that artist needed space
they need to space to live space to work
so we established the community arts
stabilization trust about two years ago
um you can find out about it at cast SF
org and what we're doing is buying
buildings in San Francisco and finding
arts groups to be in them and then
finding ways for those arts groups to
buy the building's back from us and then
we turn around and we do it again so
we've been working with Amy Cohen at the
mayor's office this is the zone that
we're mainly thinking about other we're
realizing that we have to start thinking
about San Francisco too I mean it's
start thinking about the mission to and
when you start thinking about Oakland
also and so if you're interested in
finding out about that stuff I'm please
let me know that the place that we kind
of came to is that we can't invest
outside of the the central arts district
in downtown San Francisco right now but
we can advise on other projects um we've
bought two buildings and we're working
on a couple more so the first building
is at 1007 market street you might know
it as the luggage store they are an
awesome group they've been there for a
long time what they did is they rented
their space for a long time and then
they bought a small piece of the
building from the landlord they
basically invested a some amount of
money in this and then they started
looking around for for another founder
so we come along and basically bought
the rest
of that of that building and now we are
the luggage storage landlord and they're
in the process of buying the building
back from us and so the idea that
there's like a friendly landlord like
like luggage store house here that can
help the artists today because it's part
of our mission the luggage store does
this other amazing thing in the
Tenderloin this is an alley off of ellis
street the way it looked about 20 years
ago just nothing going on there that you
want to be involved with um they came in
the pounders of the luggage store came
in and rolled turf down on this on the
street one day as an art project just to
see and the project took off eventually
they planted a redwood tree um in the
middle of the pavement and got a gate on
the front of it and now it's the
Tenderloin National Forest and it's an
extraordinary space i really encourage
you to go down there and figure it out m
ore and find out more about this it's
it's it's kind of a joke and it's a
little bit of a nod and a wink but if
you go there it's it's it's a it's a
gorgeous fantastic amazing place it's
open to everybody they bake pizzas um
they literally cracked open the asphalt
and and and and and take in this space
they have a 99 year lease from the city
and which they expect to have renewed
and this idea of a 99 year lease is this
just amazing idea right because it's far
enough away that people now just gonna
be like it's like global warming like we
don't have to deal with it for a long
time so so so so so this this idea and
so when I when I see this when I see
that this is possible I mean when you
look at the difference between you know
between between this which is you know
the status quo and this which is what's
there now with them you know with with
people playing and there's murals and
there's gardens and it's just this
incredible space if you look at it from
the roof it looks like that it's just
phenomenal so we need more of that stuff
and in order to do that we need people
who are willing to occupy space and this
is artwork this is people who came in
from nothing and turned a derelict tally
into something that they could inhabit
and that they could they could express
themselves and that the Redwood this was
taken a couple years ago the redwood
tree is bigger than the building's now
so that's cool
the other project that we just started
construction on is in the Tenderloin
also and it's at 80 Turk Street it is
also a former theater that showed a
different kind of movie for a long time
and then it fell into disrepair and was
used as an illegal rave space in the in
the ground floor and it was a grow house
on the top floor up until about two
years ago and two years ago it looked
like that um just a total wreck
I mean like it was a it was a disaster
and it was scary to walk down Turk
Street so what we've done is we've
bought the building and we've worked
we're working with a group called
counter pulse which is a really really
interesting theatre group they were in
south of market for a long time and now
they're moving into that space
construction started on that project
about two months ago and they expect to
be ready sometime in the fall and it's a
full production facility it's it's about
the same size as this may be a little
narrower but it's got three floors so
there's a floor above for apartments and
for administrative spaces there's a
giant theater downstairs and then
there's rehearsal space which is a
crucial thing that I hope grey area can
also help to ameliorate it's just this
this lack of a rehearsal space in the
city so this is permanent they are in
there they have seven years to buy it
back from us we're helping them they've
raised a capital campaign which we've
contributed to and others have it's a
really vital thing and and no one is
ever going to be able to take that
building away from them and this is what
I'm I'm really I'm trying to trying to
get out here is that this is not a
temporary solution this isn't a band-aid
fix it's not funding a program it's
about locking them in forever so I want
to talk a little bit about how this
starts and and then how it how it can
how I can leverage itself so we started
with a five million dollar grant from
the kenneth rainin foundation which is
great them and bought buildings right so
thank you generator um but here's the
thing and I just wanna talk about the
finances of it for a second and I don't
know if you guys noticed
I'm wearing a I got a dollar sign on my
belt buckle today you're saying that if
I should hook it up to my bank account
and so that every time money comes into
it it like spins and then the sparks
shootout while I'm here on the stage
okay so we didn't actually get five
million we got the promise of five
million dollars over five years so we
got half a million dollars to start and
then we've got a promissory note took
that to the bank for the five million
dollars over the next five years and not
got us a mortgage that basically means
we could take out loans which lets us by
these two buildings and then to help the
artists by them and so we can use that
money and this whole process is helping
us raise money so we've gotten money
from Packard from Hewlett San Francisco
Foundation a couple others it's been
really incredible to see that kind of
outpouring and and what we're telling
them is that real estate I'm holding the
real estate is key if you want to if you
want to do this and if you want to get
permanent about this because it lets you
leverage the asset it turns it into look
can't believe I just said leverage the
asset it it lets you unless you leverage
what you've got right you've got
something that people know that you're
committed to this place and then you're
not just some art flunky you're somebody
with a building so there's two
mechanisms that we've used to extend
this work and to and to raise more money
and I just want to talk about two of
them really quick the first one is
called new market tax credits which is
this amazing mechanism that I had no
idea about and I felt like when I
learned about this that somebody had
opened the door and showed me like how
the world actually works there are these
zones that are called new market zones I
think they're called the economic
opportunities on something like that
they're set up by the federal government
there you have distinct geographic
boundaries and they last for ten years
and if you do work that benefits the
community like art in those spaces if
you invest money into those zones the
federal government will write you a
check for twenty percent of the money
that you invest they will write you a
check it's not a tax break they give you
money you invest a thousand dollars
there they will write you a check for
200 bucks now it's actually not quite
true you have to do it has to be quite a
bit larger than that because the
paperwork is a nightmare because it's a
federal government but once you get to
the scale of real estate suddenly you
invest a million dollars in a building
in the government right
check for two hundred thousand dollars
which is a lot of art so that's
important the other thing about real
estate and that I've figured out we
figured out i should say this is a lot
of other people working on this and one
of them is my colleague meringue is
going to be on a panel with peter
hirschberg this afternoon about the new
Medicis is this thing called transfer
development rights and this is how it
works so you buy a building it's two
stories high and in a lot of places in
san francisco the zoning has changed
since those buildings especially
downtown was was done especially if
they're older buildings which are the
kind of buildings that you can afford to
buy if you're doing this kind of stuff
so you're allowed to build two stories
higher than that in the on the block
that you are and so what you can do is
if you own the building is that if
there's a building going in next door to
you or on your block or within a certain
radius you can sell your two stories to
that builder so you basically say I'm
not going to build on my spot and you
can build two stories higher which is
worth money which basically means you
can sell the air above your building
which has artistic um precedent so I'm
starting to think about this as an art
project right i mean this is like
creating something from from from
nothing there's there's there's
precedent here for artists to think this
way so what i would encourage you to
take away from this is that the point
here is to engage with with this with
this issue cast has done this gray areas
done that these other organizations are
doing it there are ways to dig in there
are ways to commit to a place there are
ways to stay these mechanisms exist and
there are people who are out there ready
to help art needs a seat at the table
it's a part of the vital mix i know
where we all believe that because we're
here but what i want to say is that
there's a way for art to take a real
meaningful stake in the conversation and
to be a stakeholder in a permanent way
thank you thanks very much